---
layout: event
title: "Public Lecture with Ana Lucia Araujo"
series: "Iberian Nights"
description: "Why We Need to Look at Africa and Brazil When Studying the History of Atlantic Slave Trade and Slavery."
date: 2024-10-01
semester: Fall 2024
start-time: 5:30AM
end-time: 7:00PM
calendar: 20241001T173000/20241001T190000
location: "HQ134"
card: humans-in-shackles.jpg
banner: araujo.jpg
featuring:
  - Ana Lucia Araujo
with:
  - Inês Forjaz de Lacerda
  - Yohely Comprés Henriquez
---

We invite you to join us for a public lecture with renowned scholar Ana Lucia Araujo around the Atlantic History of Slavery and its Memory.

### Why We Need to Look at Africa and Brazil When Studying the History of Atlantic Slave Trade and Slavery

Drawing on her new book _Humans in Shackles: An Atlantic History of Slavery_, in this talk Ana Lucia Araujo will emphasize the need of looking at Africa and Brazil when studying the history of Atlantic slave trade and slavery, as well as the role of enslaved women in shaping slave societies and societies with slaves in the Americas. By doing so, Araujo illuminates the social, cultural, and religious lives of enslaved people working in plantations and urban areas, building families and cultivating affective ties, congregating and re-creating their cultures, and organizing rebellions. Through an approach centered on history and memory, Araujo also seeks to put the lived experiences of enslaved peoples at the center of this tragic story and open opportunities to investigate the heavy impact these atrocities have had on the current wealth disparity of the Americas and rampant anti-Black racism.

## About our Guest Speaker

Ana Lucia Araujo is a historian and Professor at the Department of History at the historically Black Howard University in Washington DC, United States. She specializes in the history and memory of slavery and the Atlantic slave trade and is interested in the visual and material culture of slavery. Her work has been funded by the Institute for Advanced Study (Princeton, NJ), the Getty Research Institute (Los Angeles, CA), the American Council of Learned Societies (ACLS), and the American Philosophical Society. Her recent books are _The Gift: How Objects of Prestige Shaped the Atlantic Slave Trade and Colonialism_ (Cambridge University Press, 2023), and _Humans in Shackles: An Atlantic History of Slavery_ (University of Chicago Press, 2024). She is currently working on four different projects, including "The Power of Art: The World Black Artists Made in the Americas" (under contract with Cambridge University Press).
