---
layout: event
title: "Journée d'études on the Memory and Archives of Slavery"
series: ""
description: "You are invited for a day of study with renowned scholar Ana Lucia Araujo around the History of Slavery and its Memory."
date: 2024-10-01
semester: Fall 2024
start-time: 10:30AM
end-time: 3:00PM
calendar: 20241001T103000/20241001T150000
location: "Daytime: HQ532; Evening: HQ134"
card: register.png
banner: register.png
featuring:
  - Ana Lucia Araujo
  - Aurélie Vialette
with:
  - Marcela Echeverri Muñoz
  - Our Graduate Students
---

We invite you to join us for an exciting day of study with Ana Lucia Araujo (Howard University History) and Aurélie Vialette (Yale Spanish & Portuguese) focused on the Atlantic History of Slavery and its Memory. The day will be divided into two sessions, one in the morning and one in the early afternoon, and will culminate in a public lecture by Ana Lucia Araujo in the evening.

In the morning and early afternoon sessions, Ana Lucia Araujo and Aurélie Vialette will workshop with graduate students the art of archival research, and of writing from the archive---traversing genres, disciplines, geographies and time periods to produce original and engaging scholarship. We invite graduate students from our Department of Spanish & Portuguese, and across the Humanities and Social Sciences at Yale to participate in this workshop.

☞ Graduate students who participate in the workshop will receive a certificate of completion.

## Preparing for the day of study

In order to prepare for this workshop, we will read the chapter on "Battles of Public Memory" from Araujo's book, _[Slavery in the Age
of Memory](https://www.bloomsbury.com/us/slavery-in-the-age-of-memory-9781350048492/)_ (Bloomsbury, 2020), and "Sex and Violence" from her most recent book _[Humans in Shackles: An Atlantic History of Slavery](https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/H/bo229867701.html)_ (Chicago Press, 2024). From Aurélie Vialette, we will read two selections from the volume _[Cultural Legacies of Slavery in Modern Spain](https://sunypress.edu/Books/C/Cultural-Legacies-of-Slavery-in-Modern-Spain)_ which she edited in collaboration with Akiko Tsuchiya (SUNY Press, 2024), the "Introduction" to the volume, and her contribution, "Cosmetic of the Archive."

For the early afternoon session, we will be joined by Prof. [Marcela Echeverri](https://history.yale.edu/people/marcela-echeverri-mu-oz) (Yale History). We have included in the readings her entry, "[Antislavery and Abolition in the Spanish American Mainland](https://oxfordre.com/latinamericanhistory/display/10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.001.0001/acrefore-9780199366439-e-505)," from the _Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Latin American History_ (Oxford Press).

<div class="row justify-content-md-center mt-3">
  <div class="col">
    <a href="/documents/journee-readings.pdf" target="_blank"><button type="button" class="btn btn-primary">Download Readings</button></a>
  </div>
</div>
<br>

## RSVP

HQ532 has limited sitting, so we ask that you RSVP if you plan to attend. You only have to RSVP once.

<div class="row justify-content-md-center mt-3">
  <div class="col">
    <a href="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSftpHCQpaYUHF3fswSqE3B0GsZlbrx_Ux7uDq07ejLaOllnwQ/viewform?usp=sf_link" target="_blank"><button type="button" class="btn btn-warning text-white">RSVP</button></a>
  </div>
</div>

<br>

## Schedule

### **10:30AM-12:00PM**

#### Morning Session

### **12:00PM-1:00PM**

#### Lunch Break

Lunch will be served for participants of the daytime seminars and invited guests. Please RSVP to ensure we have enough food for everyone.

### **1:00PM-2:30PM**

#### Afternoon Session

### **5:30PM-7:00PM** | **HQ134**

#### Public Lecture with Ana Lucia Araujo

<br>

## About Ana Lucia Araujo

Ana Lucia Araujo is a historian and Professor at the Department of History at the historically Black Howard University in Washington DC, United States. She specializes in the history and memory of slavery and the Atlantic slave trade and is interested in the visual and material culture of slavery. Her work has been funded by the Institute for Advanced Study (Princeton, NJ), the Getty Research Institute (Los Angeles, CA), the American Council of Learned Societies (ACLS), and the American Philosophical Society. Her recent books are _The Gift: How Objects of Prestige Shaped the Atlantic Slave Trade and Colonialism_ (Cambridge University Press, 2023), and _Humans in Shackles: An Atlantic History of Slavery_ (University of Chicago Press, 2024). She is currently working on four different projects, including "The Power of Art: The World Black Artists Made in the Americas" (under contract with Cambridge University Press).

## About Aurélie Vialette

Aurélie Vialette is Associate Professor Tenure and Acting Director of Undergraduate Studies for Spanish. Prof. Vialette specializes in 19th-century Iberian cultural studies: carceral studies, disability studies, transatlantic studies, slavery networks, Filipino studies, popular music, journalistic discourse, archival studies, mass and working-class organizations, and Catalan Studies. She is the author of _Intellectual Philanthropy: the Seduction of the Masses_ (Purdue University Press, 2018), recipient of the North American Catalan Society Prize for Outstanding Work in the Field of Catalan Studies, 2019. Her most recently edited volume, _Cultural Legacies of Slavery in Modern Spain_, co-edited with Akiko Tsuchiya (SUNY Press, 2025), addresses the question of how modern Spanish cultural productions and institutions reflect and shape ways of understanding the history of a nation sustained on colonialism and slavery.
